Food Packaging- Lesson 2
Printing of packages, barcodes and other markings
Printing
2
➢It is a process in which text and images are reproduced, typically with ink on
substrate using a printing press made from letters, photographs and drawing.
➢The major printing processes are distinguished by (i) the method of image transfer
and (ii) by the general type of image carrier employed.
I. Depending upon the process (the printed image is transferred to the substrate
either directly or indirectly):
•
In direct printing the image is transferred directly from the image carrier to the
substrate. Examples of direct printing are gravure, flexography, screen printing and
letterpress printing processes.
•
In indirect, or offset, printing, the image is first transferred from the image carrier
to the blanket cylinder and then to the substrate. Lithography, currently the
dominant printing technology, is an indirect (offset) process.
II. Depending on the image carriers employed:
•
Image carriers (or plates) are generally be classified as relief, planographic,
intaglio, or screen.
➢In relief printing, the image or printing area is raised above the non-image areas.
Letterpress and flexography are relief printing processes.
➢In planographic printing, the image and non-image areas are on the same plane.
The image and non-image areas are defined by differing physiochemical properties.
Lithography is a planographic process.
➢In the intaglio process, the nonprinting area is at a common surface level with the
substrate while the printing area, consisting of minute etched or engraved wells of
differing depth and/or size, is recessed. Gravure is an intaglio process.
➢In the screen process (also known as porous printing), the image is transferred to
the substrate by pushing ink through a porous mesh which carries the pictorial or
typographic image. Screen printing is a porous printing.
3
•Offset Printing:
➢ A widely used printing technique where the inked image is transferred (offset) 
from a plate to a rubber blanket, then to the printing surface.
➢Books, newspapers, brochures, stationery.
•Digital Printing:
➢A method of printing from a digital-based image directly to a variety of media. It 
usually refers to professional printing where small-run jobs from desktop 
publishing and other digital sources are printed using large-format and/or high-
volume laser or inkjet printers.
Short runs of books, flyers, business cards, personalized printing.
•Screen Printing:
➢ A printing technique where a mesh is used to transfer ink onto a substrate, except 
in areas made impermeable to the ink by a blocking stencil.
➢T-shirts, posters, signage, ceramics, glass, metal, wood
•Flexography:
A form of printing process which utilizes a flexible relief plate. It is essentially a 
modern version of letterpress and can be used for printing on almost any type of 
substrate, including plastic, metallic films, cellophane, and paper.
Food packaging, labels, wall coverings, gift wrap.
Gravure Printing:
: An intaglio printing process, where the image is engraved onto a cylinder. The ink is 
filled into the engraved areas of the cylinder and transferred onto the paper.
Magazines, postcards, packaging, wallpapers.
Letterpress Printing:
The oldest form of printing text, in which a raised surface (like metal type or a plate) is 
inked and then pressed to a substrate, usually paper.
•Stationery, wedding invitations, business cards, fine art prints
3D Printing:
➢The process of making a three-dimensional solid object from a digital file by 
laying down successive layers of material.
➢Prototyping, manufacturing, medical devices, art and design
Lithography:
➢A printing process based on the repulsion of oil and water. The image area is 
treated to retain ink, while the non-image areas repel ink.
➢Posters, maps, packaging, books.
Thermal Printing
➢ A digital printing process which produces a printed image by selectively heating 
coated thermochromic paper (thermal paper) when the paper passes over the 
thermal print head.
➢ Receipts, shipping labels, barcodes.
Pad Printing:
➢ An indirect offset (gravure) printing process, where a silicone pad picks up ink 
from an etched plate and transfers it to a substrate.
➢Printing on irregular or curved surfaces like pens, bottles, and electronic
1. Lithography
➢Lithography is a method in which printing is
applied on a smooth surface using chemical
processes.
➢In this method, the positive part of an image
would be a hydrophobic chemical, while the
negative image would be water.
➢Thus, the image areas of the surface will be receptive to ink, and the non-image 
areas will repel ink and be receptive to water.
➢The image is first set off from the plate to the blanket and then set off from the 
blanket to the paper. For this reason, lithography is also called offset printing.
➢Commonly used for large or flat items such as folding cartons, corrugated  
packaging, and large labels used on packaging and retail displays.
7
➢The lithographic process operates with three basic cylinders. They are the plate
cylinder, the blanket cylinder, and the impression cylinder. All these are plain
heavy metal cylinders.
1. The plate cylinder has the printing plate wound around it. This plate is the
carrier of the image that needs to be printed.
2. The blanket cylinder has a rubber blanket wound around it. This facilitates the
transfer of the image from the plate to the blanket, and thereupon to the paper (or
other substrates), when the substrate is passed between the blanket and the
impression cylinder.
3. The impression cylinder is just a bare cylinder that acts to provide the necessary
pressure to impress the image from blanket to the substrate.
8
2. Flexography
➢It gets its name from the use of a flexible
relief plate in the process and is often
used in the printing of food packaging.
➢Flexography is a direct process where the
rubber
printing
plate
transfers
ink
directly to the printing surface.
➢This process is similar to relief printing.
The image is first engraved onto the plate
with a laser.
➢Then the ink is transferred from its chamber to an anilox roller where a blade removes
the excess ink.
➢After this is completed, the ink is pressed onto the printing surface, and the product is
coated in the desired finishing
9
3. Rotogravure
➢Gravure is a direct and rotary technique of
printing on packaging.
➢Prints
from
wrong-reading
recessed
image
cylinder to substrate directly. Hence, it is also
known as recess printing.
➢This technique is ideal for very high volumes.
➢This process includes a rolling cylinder which is engraved with the image that has
to be printed.
➢Once completed, it is inked and pressed directly onto the print surface to transfer
the image.
➢The rolling cylinder has different cell depths for ink.
➢This means that deeper cells will have more ink and will be more intense in that print 
area, whereas a shallow cell with produce a lighter outcome.
10
4. Screen printing
➢It is a pretty simple process to understand and 
operate
➢The process derives its name from this silk screen, 
which was used as the image carrier.
➢The image that needs to be printed is first captured
on a photographic material, a positive usually.
➢The positive image is then transferred to the screen, which is on the porous area of 
the screen.
➢The non-image areas are blocked out during the stage of image creation itself.
➢The screen is laid over the substrate that is to be printed and ink is poured on the 
frame over the screen.
➢The ink is then wiped across the surface of the screen using a device called a 
squeeze, a wooden device that has a rubber blade.
11
➢Since the screen is porous in nature, the ink flows through it. Because the image areas
are porous, they allow ink to flow through them. This ink is thus printed onto the
substrate beneath
➢Principal applications: can print on any substrate; point-of purchase displays,
billboards, decals, fabric, electronic circuit boards, glasses, etc.
5. Letter press/Relief printing
➢It is the earliest form of printing and remained
dominant for a very long time.
➢As the name of the process says, the image areas
are in relief and the non-image areas are in recess.
➢On application of ink, the relief areas are coated
with a film of ink and the non-image areas are
not.
➢With pressure over the substrate to bring it in contact with the image area, the image
is then transferred to the substrate.
➢It is widely used for printing on the non-porous substrates required for various types
of food packaging (it is also well suited for printing large areas of solid color).
12
➢Adesign is created on a computer; it may be an 
individual design or replicated to give several 
hundreds of impressions.
➢The ink, usually in powder form, is attracted on to
the film surface and cured in place.
➢Special coatings are necessary to receive the ink.
➢Astandard heat-sealable coating on the reverse side 
allows the film to be made immediately into 
packages.
➢The system as yet is only suitable for narrow web
widths and is capable of producing test packages
for market research or promotional campaigns.
Modern technology in printing: Digital printing
13
Barcodes
➢A bar code may be defined as a series of bars and spaces arranged according to
the encodation rules of a particular specification in order to represent data.
➢Its purpose is to represent information in a form that is machine-readable.
➢Bar codes are read by scanning devices that are programmed to analyze the
structure of the bars and spaces and transmit the encoded data in electronic
format.
Barcodes on food packaging:
1. Help eliminate food waste in the supply chain
2.Improve the amount and quality of the 
information available about the product
3.Maintain high levels of safety of consumable 
products
4. Provide accurate location and quality data about
the product.
14
➢There are several different Barcode Present that serve different uses, industries or
geographic needs.
➢Different barcode applications have different data requirements depending on their
usage.
➢There are one-dimensional and two-dimensional bar code types – UPC (Universal
Product Code), EAN (European Article Number) are the two one-dimensional codes
widely used in the retail industry.
➢One-dimensional (or 1D bar codes) represent data by varying widths and spacing of
parallel lines, and may be referred to as one-dimensional.
➢These include most of the traditional widely used bar code types in the retail
industry such as UPC and EAN bar codes.
➢UPC bar codes are used to label and scan consumer goods at points-of-sale - mainly
in the United States.
Types of Barcode
15
➢EAN bar codes are used to label and scan consumer goods at points-of-sale —
mainly in the Europe. They look very similar to UPC codes, and the main
distinction is their geographical application.
➢GS1 provides standards for use with different bar code symbols. The most widely
used barcode is GTIN (Global Trade Item Number), a new naming structure for
retail related barcodes.
➢GTINs include:
•
GTIN-12 (UPC-A): this is a 12-digit number used primarily in NorthAmerica
•
GTIN-8 (EAN/UCC-8): this is an 8-digit number used predominately outside of
NorthAmerica
•
GTIN-13 (EAN/UCC-13): this is a 13-digit number used predominately outside of
NorthAmerica
•
GTIN-14 (EAN/UCC-14 or ITF-14): this is a 14-digit number used to identify trade
items at various packaging levels
➢GS1 India is a not-for-profit , industry led global standards body headquartered at
Brussels, Belgium and was setup by Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Govt. of
India
16
•
UCC-Uniform Civil Code
•
ITF- Interleaved Two of Five – mostly used to label secondary packaging
QR Code
➢QR code, also known as ‘Quick Response’ code, is
a
two-dimensional
barcode
that
can
store
information/URL/data.
➢QR codes stock large data files and use four
standardized
encoding
modes
(numeric,
alphanumeric, byte/binary, and kanji).
➢Adding a QR code on the packaging is an effective 
communication tool
➢Because of the QR code’s fast readability and storage capacity, it is predominantly
used by food industries in compliance with food regulatory measures.
➢One can instantly access and save the PDF document by scanning the code.
➢It adds a digital element to ordinary food packaging while ensuring that consumers 
have access to important nutritional information.
17
Advantages of QR Code on Food Packaging
✓Enhancing Food Safety - QR codes play a
crucial role in improving food safety by
enabling traceability throughout the supply
chain.
✓Access to Nutritional Information - QR codes
on food packaging provide a gateway to
detailed
nutritional
information,
including
ingredients, allergens, calorie counts, and
dietary guidelines.
✓Boosts marketing - QR codes boosts product
marketing by giving the possibility to add
online social platforms, video links about the
product, multilingual product documents, and
costumer feedback and support .
18
